You are going to be seeing just how terrible my level design skills are.
That's right.
We are going to be laying out a bit of a puzzle level in this lecture as you can see.
I can't even I can't even do the puzzle myself.
That's how terrible I am both at playing the games and making them.
But we are going to be creating this puzzle design where you have to hop between the multiple platforms
in our game let's call what I can do this one I can do it.
Yes.
And we're going to use it to reach an reachable areas that are unreachable by foot.
So here's here's the first unreachable area.
The second and reachable areas over there reachable by that rather slow moving platform that's coming
towards me right now.
So let's dive in and see how you can create your own puzzle layouts.
Now this lecture should be fairly short and sweet.
We just want to get up a basic puzzle in place.
And me not really being a proper game designer I'm going to do a rough and ready job at this.
Now if you do want to see how a proper game designer would tweak and make a puzzle level like this then
let me know and I will get a proper game designer like Rick Davidson to come and give you a lecture
on how to make this properly fun properly challenging and all that sort of stuff.
But for now we're going to put together a basic level.
Okay.
So the first thing that you'll notice is that jumping around is a little bit of a faff.
In fact pretty hard to get on a platform full stop because when we jump.
It already has all that velocity and we can adjust mid-flight so for a puzzle jumping game that sort
of jumping mechanic isn't going to work because I want to fine tune my landing on the platforms and
that's pretty hard as it currently stands.
So to do this I am going to go in to the movement component of the character and you can follow along
here.
So let's have a look at our third person catch from clicking on him in the world.
And then I can go to Edit blueprint open the blueprint editor.
And what I'm hoping to do here is hopefully find some properties that we can tweak about that jumping
movement.
So open up the full blueprint editor rather than just that partial one.
I'm going to go to the components pane and open up the character movement and then go over to the details
where we've got a whole section on character movement for jumping and falling.
So there are a few components a few properties here of note.
The first one I want to point out is the air control.
Now what the air control does is tells us how much we can control the character mid air as a proportion
of our maximum walking speed.
As you can see it's set to point to so we've got some control but not a whole heck of a lot.
What else is there.
We've got the air control boost multiplier what does not particularly relevant.
It does something based on a threshold of our velocity.
We basically just want to have full control over while we're in the air what else is there.
Here we've got the air control boost velocity Again not something hugely relevant in my opinion it seems
to be a multiplier applied to our velocity.
You can have a look a bit more in detail for yourself but it's not something that I want to go too much
into.
How about this breaking deceleration that we pull out in fact to see the full names of these braking
deceleration falling.
What does that say.
Basically it's saying that if I have a lateral deceleration when falling and not applying acceleration
so basically how fast am I going to slow down if I am not speeding myself up with the arrow keys.
So that's the first thing I want to do so that when we jump while running we basically dont have a lot
of momentum to deal with so I am going to stick that up really high to Bowers and see how that goes.
So a fairly high deceleration compile the third person character go and to play and as you can see if
I go and jump and while Im running and run then jump.
Then youll notice that I am slowing down pretty quickly.
Let's do let's do the test by jumping off a ledge.
You can see that I fall very close to the ledge so that's quite handy.
That's the kind of thing that we want for a kind of puzzle jumping game one thing kind of quiet kind
a lot.
Kiner Chyna.
Okay so then what else we want to be able to control our character in the air and I think that I want
to be able to control them at full walking speed.
So I'm going to put that air control up to one compile and save and then go back and test that character
out.
So I should be able to now jump off a ledge but head straight back onto the ledge.
Okay so that's something very non physical You can't jump off a ledge and then land back on the ledge.
But for a puzzle game that's exactly what we want.
We want the level of control that allows us to just tweak ourselves onto the platform.
Now that worked a little bit funnily I think about my walking velocity was a little bit too fast seems
to be going somewhere a little bit too fast so let's see if we can tweak this just a little bit more
for our character movement.
One thing we could try to do to dampen this a little bit is increase perhaps the falling lateral friction
which is a friction applied while in the air and when falling.
So let's see if that can do anything.
I'm going to put a high value just to see what the effect is and hit play.
So we can see that it seems to be having a dampening effect on the movement which is good.
So let's give that a shot see if we can get onto the platform.
Now you can obviously do whatever you feel is necessary to get a good movement just tweak to your heart's
content.
While I'm showing you here are some basic guidelines that you can use to get that.
Working but obviously tweak it to your own content that's what's going to make it really your personalized
game with your own personalized movement.
And they can see the deceleration down a little bit actually because the eyes still seem to be in fact
need to be separate.
Quicker is what I'm saying.
So let's put that up to 2000 because I seem to be overshooting the target when I'm running up to it
so I can save and hit play and let's try and jump on the platform one more time.
Globally.
I wanted to do a running jump that seems to be decelerator me really quickly if I don't have the acceleration
there when I jump and then I have got very fine control over the whole thing.
And if I have my arrow key down here I still move forward so that's good.
I'm quite happy with that movement so we can go ahead and do the next bit of this lecture which is to
lay out a puzzle that we can actually use.
So that's going to be the challenge for you guys to set up your puzzle that should say your puzzles
are going to edit it live here in front of you.
Cause I just want to show you that the slides are there and you can always go and get them.
Remember at bitly forward slash multiplayer slides saga had present again with my newly corrected slide
and you'll be able to point out typos like that life because their lives like decks so set up your puzzle.
That's number one.
Number two is that you want to add multiple platforms to have an interesting puzzle platform you're
going to have to have multiple platforms to allow them to get you access to new areas so the player
will look around and see oh I can't get to that area.
How do I get there.
We need to use this platform.
So that's kind of fun.
You get access to new places and you have to get to progressively harder and harder to reach places
that tends to be quite a fun way to do these puzzles have at least three hops.
That's just a recommended level of complexity Obviously you a completely wild with platforms coming
out of your ears and just allow a few safe zones so it's fun to have a hop from one moving platform
to another moving platform.
It can be a little bit tough to sustain that and not have a breather.
So do add in some safe non-moving zones that you can get to as well.
Pause video and have a go at laying out your very own puzzle.
Okay welcome back.
Let's give this a shot.
Now I'm going to do as I said a very basic puzzle and I'm not a great level designer so this is going
to be just a very rough and ready job.
So first thing I want to do is create a platform go straight up into the air where it's going to intersect
with an R platform coming across over here and that other platform is going to allow us to reach a safe
zone over here.
So first off let's create the safe zone.
I'm going to create the safe zone out of one of the blocks that's just around in the environment I'm
going to use this block here.
And so the copy and paste it and I'm going there go and place it up against the wall of our environment.
Like so I'm going to move it along to be more or less in line with our platform in the y axis.
I think I think it's the y axis then I'm going to copy and paste and moving platform.
And move it up to be more or less to the target location In fact let's modify the target location of
platform number one kurs I want that target location to be right above it so it's kind of acting like
an elevator going straight up in the air.
And then at other moving platform is going to be right next to its target location and see by swapping
between the two and its own target location.
I'm going to move down.
And along to be right next to you.
Our new zone so that we can hop onto our elevator platform and then hop onto our second platform and
end up in our news then.
Okay.
So in actual fact what I think I'm going to have to do is swap around the starting location and the
target location I'm going to do that by simply moving my target location then moving my platform up
against the new zone and then moving our target location to where they touch near the target location
of our first platform.
So that basically I can Choon them to arrive at more or less the same location.
Let's go ahead and hit play and see how that looks.
First of all I'd say I've got two platforms they're moving towards each other and it's about right.
This one goes up and down about the time the other one goes across.
I might just need to make.
This one the one that go these second one that goes horizontally go just a smidge slower.
So that's let's say 18.
This is really just a tweaking game I could calculate it exactly.
But I want it to get better when we've done our second loop with the first platform which looks about
right now it's not exactly right but we can jump the distance can't we.
And you can tweak to your heart's content of course so I get up there I see that it's going up there
I can work out the puzzle in this time I jump onto my platform.
I get up to the second platform which is in the air.
So I have to jump onto it and my more or less tweaked my jumping right feels a little bit not perfect
but a little bit work that you guys can do there and I can use that second platform to access my unseen
area.
Great.
And you've got a great vantage point up there how close that.
And now finally I want to add in another hop and this hop is going to take me from this unseen area
that we currently got to one far over on the left that we could never possibly imagine getting to via
any of these steps and ladders that we've got in the middle.
So let's copy and paste that.
Well let's take it all the way over to the other war.
Like so.
It's good enough.
And then I'm going to copy and paste my horizontal platform and move it over to the other side of this
first area.
And move my target location all the way over to the final zone that we're trying to target their target
zone if you will.
So that's that looks good enough and because it's such a long distance I'm going to increase the speed
Cause I don't think it will move there any sensible rate at 80 so let's change that up to about 200
it's going to be the fastest platform.
Let's hit play.
Yeah.
It's moving a sensible speed it is faster than the other platforms but it does have to cover a longer
distance so that makes sense.
So let's hop on our first platform hop on our second platform.
And there's the tricky bit of hopping on moving platforms.
They're very small as well and very fiddly.
We can obviously change that with a little bit more tweaking replace this cube mesh with something more
elegant and more interesting which we will do.
Kate so we're going to get over to the other first unseen area.
Waiting on my slightly slow platform.
And there we go I hop the rest of the way because I'm impatient and I'm gonna now wait for the final
third platform to come along and take me to the new area over there which I can see with my eyes but
I cannot reach with my feet.
That's hop on its platform and there we go.
It's taking me take me take me across and I'm happy.
Awesome.
That's almost there almost there.
Yes.
So I think that's a simplistic but successful little puzzle design.
So I challenge you to create your own puzzle design.
And don't forget I didn't put it in the challenge.
But this is the perfect place.
In fact I'd really really ask you is part of the challenge to go and share what you've created your
level designer create a little video create some screenshots maybe if you dont have a way of creating
video and share it with the community at game dev TV.
So thank you very much.
And I will see you in the next lecture.